---
title: 'Blizzards Lost Community'
date: 'December 16, 2021'
excerpt: 'A post examining how much Blizzard Entertainment lost when imploding their community.'
---

I used to be the biggest Blizzard fanboy. Not anymore.

This has changed in the last ten or so years. Blizzard went from producing high-quality and inspiring games to being a mere steward of the worlds they created. Can this be attributed to greed or is it just the inevitable fate of all popular franchises?

In this article I want to tell the story of my history with Blizzard Entertainment, why I think it was special at the time and how it changed.
I will focus especially on Warcraft III (and its reboot as Warcraft III Reforged), as this is the titles that is most dear to my heart and that has been treated very badly. Especially the custom games community in Warcraft III was one of the most impactful in gaming history and is now just a shell of its former glory. I will also briefly touch on the value this community created for Blizzard and in general, and why something like it will likely never happen again in Blizzards domain.

My love affair with games and in particular Blizzard titles begins around 1998 as a small child - still visiting primary school, when I watch my dad reduce skeletons and other less clearly defiuned - in my childs mind - creatures to dust in Diablo. Needless to say that I was far too young for such a game and could only catch glimpses of the action over my dads shoulders, before he would notice and quickly switch windows to not corrupt my young mind further. But the damage was already done. I went on to have my first gaming experiences with titles like Civilization II and Dungeon Keeper later on, but that is a story for another time.

The first blizzard title I played was Starcraft, when I was about 10 years old. I think the expansion "Brood War" was released shortly before that.  Back then I was only allowed to play a maximum of thirty minutes and under supervision. The gritty realism of Starcraft and the newness of the aliens and monsters featured in the game set my imagination on fire. I clearly remember rebuilding parts of the game maps with childrens building blocks - Lego and wooden, using little figures to represent the alien Zerglings and human Space Marines. I still think the Starcraft universe is one of the most compelling created in the science-fiction games ecosystem. 
Borrowing heavily from the deep lore of Warhammer 40k and 90s cyberpunk - both of which I would rediscover much later - the game presents a classic setting of three factions - the human Space Marines, brutish Zerg and advanced Protoss. Each faction is wildly different from the other, Space Marines are your standard fare space faring humans; relying on technology and machinery to blow up their enemies. Fun fact: all humans in the original Starcraft are descendants of a galactic prison ship stranded somewhere far from Earth - their ancestors from Earth make their appareance much later in Starcraft II. Zerg are slimy creatures that use the DNA from the species they conquer and devour to evolve their own troops to me more effective; Zerg rely on sheer numbers that overwhelm any defense. Protoss are a species of advanced beings, mentally connected and possesing of technology so far advanced from ours it seems like magic. Each faction has a very disctinct playstyle, look and sound. This setup of factions and the resulting gameplay is very easy to learn and very hard to master. There is not "best" unit or army composition, everything has a weakness and a strength. This leads to an incredible richness of strategy, which is still evolving more than twenty years later. Professional Starcraft gamers still find new ways to get an advantage over their opponents with small changes to their strategy in a very competitive community that is still as vibrant as was when esports was in its infancy. The Starcraft community is probably one of the most resilient in the history of gaming communities - not as dominating as it used to be in terms of numbers and level of professionalism as it used to be, but most of that is just because gaming in general is so much bigger. 
Naturally when I had access to the internet the first time, Starcraft was the first title I played online. I can still remember staring at the "Updating Game" progress bar for what seemed like hours, while hoping noone would want to use the phone and kick me off the line before the update was finished. After many unsucsessful attempts I managed to log on the Battle.net or bnet - Blizzards multiplayer service for the first time. After playing - and losing - a few normal skirmish matches, I first found the custom games.  I dont think I did very well in those first attempts, English was still hard to understand and I didnt really understand what I was supposed to do. A few titles I remember playing then were Tank Battle, Sunken Defense and Marine Special Forces, but after some unsuccessful attempts I never really logged on the Starcraft Battle.net again.



warcraft III
how i play wc3, its pretty cool, i like the story, very similar setup race wise as in starcraft 1. 
then i rediscover online play, especially when the expansion comes out i get my first gaming fever, constantly thinking about the game everywhere etc, 
i go online and first find the custom games tab. then i know english much better anbd understand how the games work. i play alot of custom maps over the next 10 years. while not the only game i play i consistently come back to custom wc3 maps and there are always new ones. big maps like footie, dota, a bunch of tds, aos and many more get regular updates and form mini-communities within the larger pool. at some point TODO:find-date Dota really takes off and suddenly almost half the games played are either the newest version dota - most of them - or one of hundreds of other smaller versions. but still the variety of maps and playstyles is staggering:
- there is defense maps, each type representing hundreds of individual maps that have their own rules and variations; tower, zombie, hero, random, castle, enfos; 
- there is player fight maps, some where you control just a hero like dota, but also its father aos, hero line wars, angel arena, and others where you control a hero and other units, footie being the most popular but there are many others. 
- Subgenres of this include the risk-style maps, where you have a big map like in the boardgame Risk and control units and heroes in your territory, you have to use the army to take more territories and grow your income just like in the boardgame but in real time - there are variations of this classic wacraft 3 Risk map like lord of the rings, eras zombie invasion, warhammer 40k risk and many more . 
- then there are maps that are essentially agility tests, a subcategory are escape maps, you have to control a unit very precisely and at the same time fast along a maze or obstacle course while every missstep will end the game for you.  
- true funmaps, offshots of popular titles like Mario Party (Uther Party), and more?
- other category i forgot
- rpg maps, truly gigantic maps with whole rpg games built into them, often based on pre-existing games but many completely original
- castle fight

Some of the maps had a extreme amount of detail and work poured into them, as the wc3 map editor allowed players to use custom  models for units, buildings and provided a lot of control of textures, effects, triggers and more. It is a truly awesome creation in that it allowed beginners to create compellling and fun to play minigames inside wc3s engine. Also the map editor followed the principle of easy to learn, hard to master. It was relatively easy to get started and build a fun custom map. For more advanced maps involving triggers, scripting and customized models you had to delve deep into the map editor, learn JASS (Just Another Scripting Syntax) - the scripting language created just for the wc3 map editor, learn how to build custom 3d models and more. the wc3 map editor was a simple starting point for many working professionally with such tools today. 
The power and openness of this model - which is replicated quite succesfully at places like Roblox today - was what really makes the wc3 custom map communtiy stand out to me. There were possibly many other significant communities like it at the time, this was the first and only I interacted with back then. If you know of examples of similar communities or you know of a similar story, please reach out to me!

The ability to build a relatively impressive game in a few weeks, even days and be able to play test it instantly with other players is such a genius model of user content creation. The overall quality of the content created increases with short feedback loops and creators can experience the sheer addictive joy of game-making while not having to deal with the difficulties that come with making games in a larger, more professional context. I think it is no wonder that Roblox has become the giant it is today, building exactly on that model and surely many others will follow - and probably have already I am just not aware.

everything was great, bots for hosting games on battle.net were introduced, which lead to dota games becoming very dominant. for me this was one of the lowest points of the warcraft 3 custom maps, everything was dota, hard to find any other games.  understandable - the game hosting process was clunky and involved a lot of needless clicking and waiting - very long waiting potentially as for e.g. dota there are a hundred other instances of the game hosted and you are at the bottom of the list if you dont use a bot that constantly refreshes the game bumping it up the list. While the bots "solved" that problem, the bots got so much better until it was impossible to host and play a game wiht other when you were not using a bot. in a perverse twist of game theory, suddenly everyone had to use a bot and as dota was the by far most popular map by then, it was hard to find a playable game on another map in reasonable time. services like ent-gaming helped, provided a meta game list within the normal game list.
This situation led to me not playing the game a number of years and Blizzard also did not care about or have a solution for the problem. 

around that time moba as a game genre really took off. icefrog the creator of the orignal dota, which itself was based on aos which was based on some even more obscure map, sold dota to valve after blizzard refused to pay him for it (?). then hon and lol came, lol super popular. my (extremely inaccurate) estimate of the value of the whole moba genre is XB$. moba was created in the warcraft 3 custom map community and while it is the by far most popular that originate in bnet, there are many others. a whole host of tower defense and other defense games are probably directly influenced by the custom maps and many others too. (Tracking down the history and future of those custom maps would be interesting for a future article, let me know in the comments if you would like that.)
TODO:research-this

eventually they decided to extract some more money of this at this point a shell of a community and release 1:1 copy of warcraft 3 with updated graphics. while it worked fairly well with starcraft remastered, you could feel the rushed development and corporate greed behind warcraft 3 reforged clearly. the graphics look off and almost worse than the original 2002 graphics. Further the game frequently crashes, freezes or otherwise bugs out and requires an insane amount of cpu and ram for a 20 year old game. One good change is the new custom map creation system, where only one instance of each map is visible and players get sharded(?) to new instances of the map if they are full. This completely solves all the problems caused by bot spam and dominance of certain maps earlier. Honestly if Blizzard would have just added this feature to the original wc3 bnet and kept it running like before otherwise I would have even been happy to pay for that feature. But the overall experience of wc3 reforged has led me to seriously question my blizzard fanboy status.

it gets worse

while the fusion of activision and blizzard was the beginning of the end - and probably the worst move (in terms of game quality) that blizzard made so far, they have been able to be not super affected by it in the first years. but recently it really has begun to show that blizzard is not the game company that is close to its community and laser focused on producing quality games - profits dominate all decisions. while it is perfectly normal and acceptable for any business to generate profit, game companies like blizzard have a much more complex business model than a factory that just produces units of $game and sells them. Especially with subscription based models - irresistible to investors and basically everyone else - the business model is more one of platform building, with a focus on building a community and mutual trust and respect. In the long run such a platform is much more resilient and profitable than the classic merchant - but it can also lose the good will and trust that has been built up over time very quickly. 

in blizzards case there is still a huge community, starcraft is still basically national sport in sk and hugely popular, and world of warcraft - while also suffering from a lot of problems - continues to plow on as one of the most popular mmos. d4 is eagerly awaited - i will probably also check it out and I still enjoy playing hearthstone, hots and the occasional castle fight. 
but the awe and admiration i had for blizzard are gone. they went from a company that put quality and respect for their players above everything else to just another game maker - as unoriginal, moneyhungry and outright boring as the likes of EA and Ubisoft have every been.
 
I guess we have to wake up from every dream and if you dont die a hero you become the villain.

On a less dramatic note, while there are many problems in the gaming community today - from rampart monetization, loot boxes to NFT and even worse Meta - there are also more exciting and original indie games and ways to make a living building quality products for a community than ever before. 

there are still so many worlds and wonders to explore; new communities and business models being created and a bright future for independent games as well.

battle-net. genius platform for gaming, the first of its kind and for a long time the dominant one.

- often so much better than their competitors, that they janked the whole market with them -

Links:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warcraft_III:_Reign_of_Chaos
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/StarCraft
