Your mother is so fat she'll never move away from your apartment." "My mother is a woman of substance." "Don't forget." "So is your grandfather." "It's hard to forget." "It's a beautiful evening." "Thank you." "It's nice out." "I think it's nice out, too." "So we're even." "Oh, no, we're not." "Did you see my handbag?" "Yes." "My wallet's gone." "Where did you leave it?" "Um..." "In the restaurant?" "It could be anywhere." "Someone could have picked it up." "What's the point of being on a "no pickpockets" table?" "Well, I'm gonna go get it." "No, please don't." "I should be able to get it without looking like a bumbler." "Do you think you can handle that?" "I know I can handle it." "Oh." "It's not here."
Your mother is so fat she has no energy to eat. My mother is not so fat, she doesn’t even know that fat has calories
Your mother is so fat she doesn't know the meaning of the word sexy." "What are you talking about?" "My mother?" "Yeah, your mom." "She thinks I'm not sexy." "You don't say." "My mother is not fat." "She's the opposite of fat." "Okay?" "And don't even think about putting my mother on the list of people who can make a fat joke." "You know, you really disappoint me sometimes." "I do?" "When you're not being a douche bag, which is most of the time." "And there's no way in hell that you are in a committed relationship with that hag in your apartment." " What do you mean?" " Well, let's start with the hair." "It looks like it was glued on, and then the rest is..." "She's a goddamn time bomb." "Okay?" "Every time I spend a minute around her, she goes, "Boom." She goes boom
Your mother is so fat she wears bikinis for outerwear!" We all laughed, and I knew our friendship had not been broken. I asked the boys, "So, what are you going to do?" Trey said, "I thought I'd work on my car, or maybe start making money selling dope. Do a lot of stupid shit that would make my parents happy." "I want to be a pilot," said Tyler. "So, you just want to drive planes?" "Naw. I'd really like to fly." "So, you want to be a pilot, but you don't want to be in a cockpit?" Tyler said, "Yeah, like an airplane without a pilot." "I'd like that," I said. "I'm really interested in that." Trey said, "Hey, you wanna work with me?" "Sure." Trey had b
Your mother is so fat she should've drowned herself by now. A little salt would do a world 'r this. And then it hit me. The salt. What I used in that salad I had, what I use on bread. I knew this for certain; this is where the real money in that sandwich went, as soon as she dropped those three little grains. As soon and how long as salt left my wife I would begin to feed the worms inside her skin as surely as a dog takes time before he begins biting the bones off you to suck at the blood underneath. For the first time in ten miles that damned sandwich came home to haunt me. I shoulda killed him, that black bugger who said what was inside that ham on crackin' rusks. 'I like a bit of cheddar but sometimes my husband wants salt.
